# What is Release Management?
One of the big inefficiencies of the traditional DBA job is preparing a release of database changes. I've been involved in large releases of months of database changes bundled up that required a week of time to gather the changes, organize them, and then test deployments, worrying all the time that I've forgotten a critical change. 

Plenty of other DBAs go through similar exercises, which create stress and fear over the release process. The fear causes us to delay deployments, stacking even more and more changes up. This process can snowball until we only rarely release large batches of changes, each of these entailing lots of risk.

In this diagram, we see that we make a number of changes, but then we spend time building a package, releasing it, correcting any problems, and delaying further development. In most cases, this is because the Operations people don't always know why the deployment didn't work, and the Developers must help complete the process.

We repeat that, but because everyone is afraid of problems in the next release, we delay as long as we can. That's a normal human response. As a result, more changes stack up, and more time is taken for the release.

This continues until we rarely release, and often have problems. Studies of companies have shown this pattern takes place often. Even if the time between releases doesn't increase, the stress is there and often fewer changes occur in future release.

The idea with DevOps is that we release more often, with smaller changes. These typically are less risky changes, though with databases, this isn't necessarily true. However, we also get practice in releasing changes to give us confidence that we can make database changes when we desire. We know how to release each change, the process is scripted, and we can send changes to downstream environments more often.

There are two benefits. While we may actually get the chance to release more changes, this is not the most important benefit. The best part of the DevOps process is that we learn what works and what doesn't. We learn what our customers like and what they don't. We don't spend months implementing something like a backlog notification queue in our database if the customers decide early on this isn't useful. Or they decide they'd rather have more discount options. 

Because we release often, and get feedback from our customers, we end up building the software they want. As Donovan Brown says, we end up delivering more value to the customer.

