# Releasing Database Changes to Production and non-Production Environments

Database changes can be invasive and semi-permanent. Some database changes are difficult to undo, unlike application code changes. As a result, we want to only change our production environments when we are sure of the outcome.

An application DevOps may allow developers to release changes to production, or even practice a deployment in a test environment and then immediately release to production. We don't typically want to do this with database changes because mistakes are more difficult to unravel. In a database DevOps process, we want to release to test and at least one more intermediate environment to ensure our changes will work correctly and have the desired effects. 

## Using a Staging Environment

My approach has been to have a staging environment that duplicates production as closely as possible. This might be a full database restore from production, but at the very least, the current schema from production should be copied to a database and our database changes applied. In this way, we have an idea of whether the upgrade will work as expected. 

If you can release to multiple intermediate environments, perhaps user acceptance enviroments or load testing environments, you get even more confidence in your database release process.

## Approval Gates
While an Application DEvOps process may allow developers to deploy their changes when they are ready, database changes often have some approval process in place. Because a database often is a central resource for many applications, or even different parts of the same application, we often want to coordinate release times.

This means that a database change often requires some approval process. In our demo, we'll see how VSTS makes this easy to implement in a DevOps process.

While you might expect that we include an approval before we release to production, I typically want a DBA, or other trained individual, to approve the deployment to a staging environment. The reason for this is I want the person to see the changes as early in the process as possible. If there are issues, we want to find out quickly and make changes. Waiting until the production deployment often puts pressure on the DBA to approve the release, often to coordinate with application changes. This can shortcut the process and lead to data integrity issues, which can be difficult to undo.

By requiring an approval for the staging deployment, the developer can get feedback sooner on whether their changes are appropriate.