# Validating Deployments

One of the important things to do is validate your deployments and ensure that the changes you expected to complete are the ones that were deployed to your systems.

This is easy in application code as the files can be compared to those produced by the CI process, or hash values of the files content can be compared to an artifact repository.

For a database, we really need to compare our database schema, and potentially data, to the state of the code that was output by our CI process.

## State Based Deployment
For state based deployment, we should have a package that contains the code from our VCS. We can use this package to verify the deployment, just as we used this package to build the upgrade script.

Any errors should be noted and logged, but a verification helps ensure that all the changes we wanted to deploy were actually completed in the process.

## Migration Based Deployment
For a migration based deployment, we should be tracking which migration scripts have been run and only run new ones. Checking our migration tracking table or file can ensure that we know which changes were deployed.

## Data Changes
One of the more complex problems with database deployments occur when data changes are a part of the release. It can be difficult to easily detect if the data changes were performed correctly. An example might be where a column is split into two new columns. There may not be an easy way to determine if the data is correct.

In this case, a set of rows that contain a representative set of data changes need to be checked afterwards to be sure that the data manipulation is correct. My recommendation is that you choose a set of rows with complex changes and write scripts that check to see the end result of changes in these rows match your expectations. These scripts will function as a smoke test of the deployment, and should be included as the last step of the deployment. As with unit tests, these scripts should return a failure if the data is not correct.
