# Server Configuration Outside the Database

SQL Server is unique in that the server instance can contain multiple databases, and it can have its own configuration, data and other strcutures that may need to be managed along with database changes.

In this section, we'll talk a bit about how to manage these particular challenges in your database DevOps process.

## Server Level Structures and Data
Let's look at SQL Server for this section, though other platforms may have similar needs. SQL Server is a platform that has its own configuration, scheduler in SQL Agent, logs, notifications with Database Mail and more. As part of your database development, you may identify certain items outside of the database that need to be included in your application.

One example of this might be logins, which are required to connect to the SQL Server. Managing these can be tricky as many of the tools that aid with database development, CI, and RM, don't address those items outside of the database.

Many of the tools, however, do allow for ad hoc scripting to be included in your deployment packages. In the case of SSDT and ReadyRoll, pre/post scripts can be written that will run arbirtary SQL code as a part of your deployment. PowerShell is also becoming a very useful and widely understood tool for managing systems. Most CI and RM tools will execute PowerShell scripts, which can be stored in a VCS, checked out, and used to deploy code changes.

Including these items becomes important in ensuring your deployments run smoothly on production systems, but this can be tricky for intermediate environments where we may not have completely duplicated environments. For example, we may not have a test or staging mail server that we can use. We may need separate queue names for messaging systems, or even disparate paths for things like Extended Event targets.

As a result, the best solution here is to involve your operations staff and get them to begin treating their systems more like development platforms and start storing their configuration as code.

## Configuration as Code
One of the concepts of DevOps is that we can easily recreate new environments in our infrastructure, and also ensure that we can verify that our existing environments conform to a known configuration.

The way to do this is by ensuring that all our configuration items, our paths, our settings, and more are captured and stored in a VCS. This concept isn't familiar to many operations people, especially DBAs, so it becomes important for developers to help them learn how.

There are various tools available these days, such as Puppet, Chef, PowerShell DSC, and Azure Resource Manager Templates that allow us to store templates as well as parameter files to recreate systems, or reset configurations. These can be applied to SQL Server instances to ensure that the expected state of the server is what we expect.

Having templates ensures that all environments, from development to test to staging to production, are all configured the same, reducing the chances of human error during tasks that are often repeated, but mundane.
