# Dealing with Database Drift

One of the nice things about much of your compiled application code is that individual .exes or .dlls can't be easily changed. This isn't always the case as configuration files, web files such as ASP.NET files, and other items can be changed in the live system. Tracking down issues from changed files can be problematic, though simple timestamps on the files are often a clue.

Tracking changes to database code is a little harder, though we can usually determine the last time a particular object was changed in SQL Server. What often slips by, however, are new objects added to a database, such as indexes, constraints and other structures.

When the production database changes from the known state (or the state after the last deployment), we call this database drift. This means that someone has changed the database structure in production, which means that we must account for the changes when we perform future deployments.

I don't know of any way to prevent database drift in production. Our live databases are often critical and must perform well. If we detect an issue that can be fixed with a new index or other change, we often need to make the adjustment. While a smooth DevOps pipeline might reduce the need, there will always be changes that need to be made at a strange hour when we can't necessarily follow our normal process.

As a result, we need to do two things. One, detect the changes, and two, feed those changes back into our development process and ensure they are stored in our VCS.

Detecting changes is hard, unless you have a way of tracking all DDL alterations to your database. Built-in tools, such as Extended Events or SQL Audit can help, but these often produce lost of data and diligence is required on the part of the DBA to regularly review the logs. For on-premise databases, DDL triggers and tools such as the free DLM Dashboard can alert staff to changes made in production. 

For database such as Azure SQL Database, what I would recommend is including a snapshot of the database after each deployment. This would provide the baseline for our database code. Before the next deployment, a comparison between this snapshot and the production database should be included as a part of the deployment process. If there are changes, then the deployment should be aborted and a DBA should examine the changes to determine if there are potential conflicts with the new changes. If so, they can perform mitigation back in the development database and build a new deployment package. 

If there are no issue with the deployment, then the DBA can first ensure the changes are captured back in the development VCS, and then create a new snapshot from the production database to ensure the deployment can proceed.

I would actually recommend that this take place in a staging area, that is refreshed from production prior to any practice deployment.