# Additional Testing in the Release Process

We've talked about a few ways in which we might have additional checks during our release process. We've mentioned the need for smoke tests with data changes in an earlier video. In the previous video, we talked about database drift checks before proceeding with a deployment.

We can make other checks as well during our release process that help to determine if we have any issues that can be mitigated, or that might prevent a flawed release from taking place.

## Integrated Testing
While unit tests can help determine if particular sections of code, such as stored procedures or functions, are working correctly, these do not ensure the entire application works correctly.

After unit tests pass, for both the application code and database code, we often need to perform higher level tests that can integrate multiple parts of the system. We may ensure a complex database process works by running multiple queries or batches against the database. We may also want to execute various functions from the application and ensure that the proper changes are made in the database, or that the application receives the correct data back.

These tests can be more cumbersome, more brittle because of dependencies on the application structure, and more lengthy to execute as they may not easily be run in parallel. Therefore, these can be more difficult to automate. However, the adding automation to parts of the application that are more stable, especially where APIs are involved, can ensure that database changes are not disruptive to the overall application.

## Performance Testing
It seems that the database is often seen as a sourc of performance issues. That can be true, especially when the database is a central point of access for many users. Often poorly written database code, or poor database design, are the culprits.

Using a DevOps process for your database development can help alleviate issues, as changes to tune queries or flawed designs can be deployed more often. If an issue is found, then it can be fixed in a subsequent deployment.

However, using a DevOps process here should also help prevent poorly written code from being deployed in the first place. At some point, your development pipeline should include a performance test that loads the new database structure with enough test data to simulate the production system and run a similar workload to what the production system will encouter.

If possible, we would use the production data, and a workload taken from our production system that can be replayed on the test system. That isn't always something you can do, but it's a good starting point. However, ideally, I'd take my production data (or a similarly  set of test data with the right skew) and I'd increase the data size. Our data rarely shrinks, so testing at my production data size isn't a good test for the future. I'd recommend you use 1.2-1.5 times the production data set.

There are tools to help you add test data to a system and increase the data size.  There are also load testing tools to replay workloads, which will let you increase the numbers of users. Again, use a larger than current workload size to simulate some growth.

Tools can be especially important in this process if you don't want to maintain this system and keep this disk space occupied full time. It is, however, important to have similarly sized hardware that allows you to determine how your application will perform. If you don't have the same size of RAM/CPU, then perhaps scale this down in a way that lets you extrapolate. Perhaps half the RAM and CPU, and compare the stress on the system to that of your production workload.

## Smoke Testing
Smoke testing is a way of ensuring that critical parts of our system are working after a deployment, but before we allow customers to test functionality. These smoke tests alert us to potential problems quickly, hopefully in time to allow us to correct an issue immediately. For example, we might run a test that makes a simple connection to the database server to ensure it is still running after a deployment.

When we deploy database code, we may want to make various checks to ensure that we have not forgotten something. For example, for a new table or stored procedure, we may want to log in as an application user and ensure we can access the object. If we change the schema for replicated structures, we might query a downstream subscriber to ensure that the changes have migrated to other systems. Or we may want to check that replication is running, as this often is turned off for deployments in some environments.

Almost any sort of check of a new, or existing, critical item in a database is a good candidate for a smoke test. The main criteria is that the smoke tests need to be quick. I wouldn't recommend a specific number of smoke tests, but I'd want all of them to be completed in less than 5 minutes. This way we can quickly evaluate if our changes were successful.

## Testing Matters	
The most important part of any DevOps process is the feedback that is given to developers and operations staff from the changes that developers make and the effects on the system. Testing is a critical part of this feedback. Without a series of tests that can increasingly raise the bar of quality, you are developing more software changes, without actually improving your process. You may even be developing the wrong changes if you don't ensure that your code performs as expected.

Testing is a great way of documenting functionality as well as ensuring that all developers conform to the same requirements. While writing and maintaining tests takes time and effort, the benefits outweigh the costs with higher quality, more correct code.