# When Things Go Wrong

While a DevOps process should allow you to test your code and deployments multiple times, there are always going to be cases where your system has a problem, despite your best efforts.

In these cases, what can you do? For your application code, the rollback process is usually to copy the previous version of your binaries back to the clients as a way of undoing the rollback. Can we do the same thing with our database code?

## Some Database Code is Code
As we discussed early in this course, some of our database code is code like any other application code. Our views, stored procedures, functions, assemblies, and more are just code. We can replace the deployed versions with the previous versions, easily going back and forth.

Ideally we would like to roll forward. Having staff that understand the code available will allow them to decide if they can produce a fix quickly and deploy it. If you can deploy a fix in your normal pipeline, do that. If the fix results in drift on the production system, ensure the change is fed back to development branches immediately.

Of course, like our application code, we want to be sure the various objects still function correctly, but three isn't any technical hurdle to using the previous version from our VCS.

I don't know of any tools that automatically build rollback scripts, but comparison technology can quickly generate scripts with previous versions of code.

## Tables
Tables represent a unique problem for rollbacks since they must maintain the state of their data during deployments or rollbacks. Some changes may be simple to rollback, but some may be complex. For this reason, I haven't seen a good way of automatically undoing table changes.

For example, a new column that causes issues can be fixed with a drop column statement. However, if some data has been entered into a new column, what's the proper way to handle this? Do we save that data? What if we have performed a column or table split? It may not be easy to move the data back to its original state.

What's more, some changes can take significant time in large databases. There are times when a database restore might be a better choice than trying to undo the changes. These are decisions a database administrator must make. 

Ultimately the way to rollback table changes will be situation dependent. Smaller, more frequent changes might limit the potential issues, but whenever a table change is made, the developers and operations staff should consider the way in which they might undo the changes and be prepared to respond. 

## Data
Some deployments to databases may change data. Perhaps lookup or reference data is altered in a release. Maybe some substantial changes are made, such as migrating data types in between columns.

Just as with table changes, undoing data manipulations are sometimes very difficult, especially when the transformations are complex. As with table changes, the rollbacks are not necessarily worth scripting. Instead, backup and restore might be a better choice. This makes pre-deployment backups very important.

## Security
A database includes its own security structure and model. Both principals and objects can have rights assigned to them. We may alter these security structures during deployments to meet the needs of the application.

Rolling back security changes may mean performing the reversing actions. As with non-table changes, comparion technology can help here to determine which security settings were changed.

Since many security changes are simple and discrete, it may not be worth developing scripts or tools to automatically generate the rollback code. Instead, I would trust staff to determine which rights are problematic and manually running the reversing tranactions. 

As with any emergency change, a second person should review and verify the changes, and anything executed should be rolled back into the development trunk to ensure future development incorporates these changes.

## Be Prepared
Since database changes tend to be harder to undo than application code changes, it behooves everyone in the DevOps process to be preprared for issues. This is especially important as a DevOps process is being implemented, since there will be mistakes made as your staff learns the particular idiosyncracies of your environments.

One way that operational staff mitigates potential issues is with backups taken before upgrades. Many relational systems such as SQL Server allow for backups to be taken while the system is live. A formal backup can be scripted into the release process to provide insurance against catastrophic issues.

One additional step that I recommend for databases as well is to snapshot the code in production before a deployment. Often the changes made will not be data changes, and a quick snapshot provides a way to easily generate rollback scripts for specific objects. 

As a post-deployment step, I would also ensure that a new snapshot of the latest version of all code is captured as well. This can be useful in preparing future intermediate environments, such as test and staging, where we want to mimic production and practice the next deployment.
