# Database DevOps - Course Overview

Welcome to database DevOps. This course is designed to cover the ways in which DevOps development practices can be introduced to database development. 

My name is Steve Jones and I am your instructor for this course. I am the editor of SQLServerCentral and an evangelist for Redgate Software. I've been working with databases, mostly SQL Server, since 1991. I've been a developer, DBA, and manager across a variety of industries and companies in my career. I founded SQLServerCentral with the goal of teaching people to learn more about the platform, become better database developers, and produce better database software.

I now work for Redgate software, where we build tools for software developers and DBAs to enable them to efficiently work with SQL Server. We have worked hard to help enable people and developers to incorporate their databases into a DevOps software development process.

I hope that you will gain some valuable skills that will help you include your databases alongside your other software development processes.

This course will consist of four modules. We will start with an introduction to DevOps and how databases fit into the DevOps ideas. We will then look at ways to incorporate a database into your version control and CI processes. We'll look at Release management and end with a discussion of a few more advanced database development challenges.

Each module will consist of a variety of course materials, including lecture, demonstrations, and activities. Each module will have an assessment quiz and there will be a final exam at the end.

Our goals in this course are for you to learn how to:
- Define DevOps
- Indentify the challenges of using databases that are separate from other software languages and platforms
- Include your database code alongside other application code in a version control system (VCS).
- Setup a Continuous Integration (CI) platform for your database code.
- Write and include automated unit tests for your database code.
- Develop an automated release process that deploys database changes to both on premise and cloud databases.
- Understand the use of branching and merging for database code
- Instrument and monitor the database after deployment

This course will focus on the concepts of including your database in a DevOps process, but we will use Microsoft SQL Server and tailor our examples for this platform. Other relational or non-relational database platforms will have similar concepts that can apply, but we will not examine specific techniques for implementing a DevOps process.

Again, welcome and thanks for taking this course from Microsoft.
