# Course Syllabus

## Module 1 - Introduction to Database DevOps  
DevOps is a set of principles and ideas, that are very useful in developing higher quality software at a faster pace. DevOps is not prescriptive, however, which means that the actual implementation in different environments may vary. Because of this, and with the nature of database development, incorporating your database into a DevOps development process has a number of challenges. In this module you will learn:
* An overview of what DevOps is and how it relates to database development. 
* Why database development is a challenge
* The difficulties of working with database programming languages and data
* Why traditional database staff avoid DevOps style processes
* The difficulties of deploying and potentially rolling back changes
* The concept of database drift and its impact on database development.
## Module 2 - Including Database Code in a CI Process
Application software developers have long been familiar with the concepts of storing their code in version control. In the last decade, the practice of continuous development has grown tremendously with many application developers. The database hasn't always been included, but this module aims to show that it can easily adopt those same practices. This module will look at 
- Organizing database code in a VCS
- Different methods of dealing with the lack of tooling for many SQL based systems
- Understanding how to track data changes in a VCS
- Examining what a CI build looks like for databases.
- Covering the options for testing database code
- Discussing the ways we package up the output of the CI process.
## Module 3 - Automating the Deployment of Database Code
Database code releases have typically be stressful events, which usually occur rarely. This lack of deploying code also means less reliable and riskier deployments. In this module we discuss the reasons and techniques for ensuring better releases of database code. This module will examine:
- What a release management process should be
- How to package up and release in a stated based development paradigm
- How the release of migration scripts works
- Adding gates and approvals to your database releases
- The different ways to validate a release
- How we can rollback a problematic release
## Module 4 - Advanced Topics for Database DevOps
There are so many ways that database development can take place as well as many other aspects of database development that are important beyond the storing, building, and deployment of code. In this module we will look at:
- Monitoring the effects of your database deployment.
- Incorporating branching and merging of database code into your process
- Provisioning development, testing, and production environments
- Some of the best practices for database development
- The complexities of deploying to more than one database envionment at a time







