# What is DevOps

DevOps is a term that has come to mean different things to different people. There are many descriptions of what DevOps encompasses, and how to implement a DevOps team or process inside of a company. However, I like the short description from Donovan Brown of Microsoft. On the screen we can see his quote that say "DevOps is the union of people, process, and products to enable continuous delivery of value to our end users."

I really like that definition as it shows that the ultimate goal of a DevOps process is to ensure we deliver value to our users. That's what we want to accomplish, providing something the users of our software, our application, find useful and valuable. Everything is based on delivering results.

How we do that isn't important, nor is there any one way to do accomplish our goals. We need to use our people working inside of some process, and with some products or tools. But we need to put those things together and ensure that everything works together to produce something valuable.

That's the goal of DevOps, and ultimately it involves as much a change in people and process as it does using some sort of tool or product. In fact, the people and process change is going to be more important, and certainly going to take longer than implementing any tool.

There's another part of that post that I want to also quote. It says:
"It is very important to realize that DevOps is not a product.  You cannot buy DevOps and install it.  DevOps is not just automation or infrastructure as code.  DevOps is people following a process enabled by products to deliver value to our end users."

The important thing to understand as we go through the rest of this course is that the goal of each part of this definition is important. While I will show some products and tooling, from both Microsoft and other companies, these products are just one way to accomplish the goal. Whether this is using git to manage our code or deploying automatically with VSTS, there important concept is that you understand how to manage code or deploy code.

There are three main principles of DevOps, as documented by Gene Kim. Mr. Kim is a entreupeneur and researched best known for authoring The Phoenix Project and the DevOps Handbook. He postulates that these principles should guide you in your DevOps journey. First is Systems Thinking, where we look at the performance of the entire system. We can't optimize or just look at one department or silo. We can't look at developers as more important from operations or testers. We need to consider the entire system from end to end to ensure we are not optimizing one part at the expense of others.

The second way involves ensuring that information about effects is always passed back along the pipeline. This is often known as "shift left". In this case, we want to quickly let the left side of our pipeline, the developers, know if something is producing value or not. We want to let them know if they are slowing down the software deployment process in some way. We want to ensure that as they change anything, we give them feedback quickly. An example of this is letting developers know quickly if the code they checked in will cause any problems with other developers' code.

We also want to amplify the feedback loop so that information is not lost. Both developers and operations must communicate here and ensure that as we improve our process, and people get busy, that we don't let information slip by. Operational DBAs are notorius for making change in production to improve the performance of code, but not telling developers why. Not only can this cause potential conflicts with future deployments, but this also doesn't help developers learn to produce better database code. We want to ensure in the second way that developers get the feedback they need to raise the quality of their software over time.

The last way is the key. Everyone must look to learn more about the system and their craft, experimenting with new ideas. Without a doubt, some of these experiments will fail. However, we want these to fail fast and with limited impact. Ideally, our failures take place in non-production environmenst. However, we always learn, and ensure others learn, from our efforts.  

These diagrams show that the flow from left to right, with feedback occuring from right to left. We really have a loop, and in the world of databases, I think a loop presents a better image for our technical journey. Here is a flow of our database development, going in a circle. We start with our developers, we move to a build of our system, then testing, then packaging our changes up for release.

That's what we'll cover in this course. The rest of the technical side, monitoring, backups, and provisioning new systems is important, but it won't be covered here.

There are many more ways to describe DevOps and certainly plenty of different implementations that accomplish the same results. Keep that in mind throughout this course. The demos and the labs show just one way of doing things. You will need to discover what works best in your environment and with your staff.