# What is DevOps?

DevOps is a term that has come to mean different things to different people. There are many descriptions of what DevOps encompasses, and how to implement a DevOps team or process inside of a company. However, I like the short description from Donovan Brown of Microsoft. On the screen we can see his quote that say “DevOps is the union of people, process, and products to enable continuous delivery of value to our end users.”

I really like that definition as it shows that the ultimate goal of a DevOps process is to ensure we deliver value to our users. That’s what we want to accomplish, providing something the users of our software, our application, find useful and valuable. Everything is based on delivering results.

How we do that isn’t important, nor is there any one way to do accomplish our goals. We need to use our people working inside of some process, and with some products or tools. But we need to put those things together and ensure that everything works together to produce something valuable.

That’s the goal of DevOps, and ultimately it involves as much a change in people and process as it does using some sort of tool or product. In fact, the people and process change is going to be more important, and certainly going to take longer than implementing any tool.

There’s another part of that post that I want to also quote. It says:
“It is very important to realize that DevOps is not a product.  You cannot buy DevOps and install it.  DevOps is not just automation or infrastructure as code.  DevOps is people following a process enabled by products to deliver value to our end users.”

The important thing to understand as we go through the rest of this course is that the goal of each section is important. While I will show some products and tooling, from both Microsoft and other companies, these products are just one way to accomplish the goal. Whether this is using git to manage our code or deploying automatically with VSTS, there important concept is that you understand how to manage code or deploy code.

There are three main principles of DevOps, as documented by Gene Kim. Mr. Kim is a entreupeneur and researched best known for authoring The Phoenix Project and the DevOps Handbook. He postulates that these principles should guide you in your DevOps journey. First is Systems Thinking, where we look at the performance of the entire system. We can't optimize or just look at one department of silo. We can't look at developers as more important from operations or testers. We need to entire system from end to end to function efficiently together.

The second way involves ensuring that information is always passed all along the pipeline, from Dev to Ops. We want to also shorten the feedback loop, as well as amplify it so that information is not lost. Both developers and operations must communicate here and let each other know about what works well, in addition to problems.

The last way is the key. Everyone must look to learn more about the system and their craft, experimenting with new ideas. Without a doubt, some of these experiments will fail. However, we want these to fail fast and with limited impact. Ideally, our failures take place in non-production environmenst. However, we always learn, and ensure others learn, from our efforts.  

There are many more ways to describe DevOps and certainly plenty of different implementations that accomplish the same results. If you want to learn more about general DevOps practices and ideas, take a look at the EdX course from Microsoft: DEV212x Introduction to DevOps
