#Better Collaboration
Historically there has been more tension between production database staff and database development staff than between other developers and sysadmins. Perhaps this is because the database must maintain state and contains the most critical data of an organization. Perhaps this is because most sysadmins don’t deal with systems that must maintain state across deployments. No matter why, DBAs have often been seen as an impediment to developers getting their features and changes deployed to users.

DevOps seeks to build more collaboration between everyone involved in building software. In order for both the production DBAs and developers to work together, each must learn to understand the needs of the other and modify the way they work.

This is a challenge in many organizations, and requires someone to step up and show empathy and understanding to the other side. My view is that the developers should start the process, since the DBAs (or other production sysadmin) is often concerned about changes that might cause irreversible damage to the database. If this happens, the DBA may need to restore the database, causing lots of downtime and upsetting many people in the organization.

A developer, however, can express their understanding of the challenges faced by the DBA by working together to limit the impact of changes, or understand the best way to make these changes.

Conversely, the developer needs to get work done, so the DBA should ensure that they are open to being more flexible when the changes aren't risky, such as stored procedure changes. DBAs can also work with developers to discuss how to make changes in a way that won't cause issues or how rollbacks should be structured.

DBAs can also be sure that they feedback any production drift changes, such as indexes, security changes, etc. to the developers to prevent future issues.
