# Database DevOps Demo
In this section, I will show a complete demo of how a mature database DevOps process can work. This process will showcase the following:
1. I will add tasks to a work board in VSTS that need to be accomplished.
2. I will make the following changes to a local database
  * a new NOT NULL column added to a local database.
  * a new table with data
  * A new stored procedure added that updates the column
  * A unit test that verifies the stored procedure works.
2. These changes will be committed to a local git respository and then pushed to a remote server, associating the commit with the work items.
3. A Continuous Integration (CI) process will automatically execute a build and test of the changes.
4. Upon a successful build, the changes will be deployed to a QA database.
5. I will then manually approve a release to a production database, which will be handled automatically by VSTS.

In the majority of this course I will use Visual Studio Database Projects and ReadyRoll Database Projects for the labs. However, there are many other ways to implement a DevOps process with a database and I want to showcase one of those ways. I work for Redgate Software, and we have spent quite a bit of time trying to help database developers adopt DevOps processes. Using a few tools from Redgate along with VSTS, I will show how smooth a DevOps database development process can be.
The important things to remember are that adhereing to the concepts of using Version Control, Continuous Integration, Testing, Continuous Delivery and Release Management is what allows the database to work within this model. The actual tools and techniques can vary from one environment to the next.
