# Getting Database Code into a VCS

In this section, we will look at some practical ways that a database developer can store their database code in a VCS. For the rest of this course, we will use git as our VCS, but the principles and practices apply to any version control system.

## Getting Database Code

One of the challenges, as mentioned before, is getting your database code. Various platforms will allow you to generate the SQL code with different techniques. Since I primarily deal with the Microsoft SQL Server platform, I'll use that in my examples, but the ideas are applicable to any platform. 

There are two issues with tracking code. The first is what code am I capturing, and the second is the mechanical process. We will discuss some techniques for the mechanics in a moment, but let's first talk about what code we capture.

In application code, I always see the full set of code for a structure. For example, in a simple C# class, I might have a class like this. If I decide to a method, I have a complete set of code that existed, and my changes. At any point in time, I really have valid code.

Contrast this with SQL code. If I create a table, I use this code. If now want to add a FK, I use this code, which is part of the table, but isn't valid if the table doesn't exist. If I now want to add permissions, that's separate code. If I realize I've made a mistake in design, I use different code still. If I also then decide to add a PK, still more code. These need to be run in this order, and potentially may need still further code if data exists in the table. If I were to store these five items in my VCS, because they're the "versions" of the table, I need to really see all versions to understand my table. Or I need to always store the current "CREATE" script.

No matter what process you use, you will want to capture revisions to the objects, which means you need a VCS of some sort. While there are many you can use, I tend to prefer git, and I usually use the git services provided by VSTS. That is what we will use in examples and demos for this section.

## Manual Tracking of Code

If you are writing the code yourself, as in typing T-SQL into some editor, you can perform a File | Save operation to capture your code. Whether you work in Visual Studio or Management Studio, each time you create a new object, you can save your code to the file system. Each time you need to edit an object, you may need to open the file corresponding to the object code. 

However, this does mean that you need to organize your code somehow and properly name the objects. One way to do this is shown on the slide. This is what SSMS will generate for you when you script out each object in your database to a separate file. This becomes confusing quickly, especially in a manual process as the naming of the object includes the type. When trying to find a particular type of object to edit, this can be cumbersome for the developer.

Another way is to use the default SSDT structure, which is shown here in my VSTS repository. In this structure the code is stored under a folder named for the schema (dbo and auditing) with subfolders for each type of object and then a single .SQL file that is named for the object. Other items, such as users and roles, are stored under the "Security" folder at the top level.

Yet another way to manage your code is include all the objects at the top level, as shown here. This is how SQL Source Control from Redgate will setup a repository. In addition to the various SQL Server objects, there are Data and Custom Scripts folders to keep additional code.

A final way of managing your code is what many migration tools and frameworks use, which is to number your script files. Each of these files could contain code that create any type of objects, changes data, alters security, or even performs multiple changes. The naming in this case is chosen to simply the deployment process where some program will execute each script file in order.

No matter which of these you choose, all your developers will need to adopt the habit of saving their code as files in addition to compiling the code in their SQL Server database.

## Using Database Projects
If you perform development within a Database Project in Visual Studio, then much of your code is tracked within the project. As you add new types of objects, Visual Studio tracks which are committed and uncommitted to your VCS. 

If we look at my Database Project, we can see that I have a number if items in my model. I can add new objects, for example, I can create a new view. I can right click and add a view here, writing the code. I can publish this view, and it will appear in my database. I can check in the Object in either SSMS or VS. My view is in the Team Explorer and I can commit this to my VCS.


## Using ReadyRoll
An alternative to VS Database Projects are the ReadyRoll Database Projects. These build on regular database projects, but include some additional features to manage changes as a series of scripts.

As I perform development, ReadyRoll will create new scripts to track the changes made to the database. These scripts are automatically numbered so that they can be executed in the same order at deployment time.

Let's look at a ReadyRoll project and make a new change. If I check my Team Explorer, I have no new changes detected. If I refresh my ReadyRoll window, we can see that our database is in sync with the project. We'll now make a new change. I'll alter the Product table and add an Active flag. Once I do this, I can click "Update" and then "Generate Script". As we see here, a new migration script has been generated. I can rename this to make it more descriptive, leaving the numerical value at the beginning of the filename.

## Using Third Party Products
There are various other ways that we can track changes. Third party tools can integrate into VS or SSMS to capture the database changes and commit them to source control.

Let's look at one more project. I have another database that I've linked to my VCS with SQL Source Control. I can make changes in SSMS, either with the designer or by writing code. I'll add a new table with the designer. We'll call this the logging table, and we can save the design to our database and see the object in the list of tables. I'll also create a new stored procedure to get the last 10 rows from the logging table and compile that code. Now I can use my SQL Source Control plugin to detect the changes and commit them to a source control repository. I do need to push these changes and then when I check my repo, I see the changes are stored.


# placeholder - not used
However, if I make a change in the database, which is often where people are testing code and updating the system, I need to run a publish (or schema compare) to get my changes back into the model. For example, let's remove that SELECT * and list columns.
 (demo)
 I'll open the view from the database, and make a change. Now, if I save this, the change exists in the database. Any user or application querying the database will see the change, but the change doesn't exist in my project. To get this change, I'd need to run a schema compare and sync the changes in the database with the project.
 In this case, I need to ensure I treat the database as a downstream environment, and not make changes there. All fixes I need to make should occur in my Database Project, with a deployment to the actual database.
 Periodically, I also need to get in the habit of running a schema compare to ensure that any changes made to the database are reflected in my local database project.
