# What is Database Continuous Integration
This section covers how CI relates to databases.

## Continuous Integration for Application Code
CI for most code involves taking all of the changes made by a developer and adding them to the existing code base, performing a compile, running automated tests, and ensuring the there are no errors. If this is the case, then the resulting build artifact (.exe, .dll, .jar, etc) is output as an artifact and stored.

The idea here is that small changes can be assessed as to whether they cause issues with other developer changes.

## Continuous Integration for Database Code
For databases, many developers work in a shared database so that changes made can be seen by all other developers. In this way, theoretically, any issues are detected early.

The reality is that often this doesn't detect changes and since all developers see all objects, we can easily overwrite another developer's changes. In addition, if we are not running a complete set of code against the database, meaning testing all application code that interacts with the database, we can easily miss potential issues.

A database CI process should function similarly to an application process, but there are a couple differences. We will still perform a build of the software, test it, and output an artifact, but the process is slightly different.

First, the compile process requires that we ensure our entire set of code actually compiles. We can do that in two ways, depending on our development model. Let's look at each of these.

### State based development.
To perform the build, we can create a scratch database and execute all code against it to verify there are no issues, ensuring that all of our code is sytactically correct and all necessary object references are correct.

This type of build essentially uses comparison technology to move all code from our VCS to a blank database, creating all objects. If there are migration, data, or other scripts that need to be included, they need to be a part of this process. This doesn't ensure that our upgrade script will work, but just provides a "fail fast" test of all our code.

### Migration based development
In the case of migration scripts for all our changes, all the scripts need to be run, from the first to the last. Again, this mimics the actual actions taken during development, and ensures that our scripts will correctly build a database.

## Testing our code
As with application code, we want to run unit tests, and potentially other types of tests, against our database code. The idea with automating these tests is that we ensure the tests are always run against code that is checked into our system. This avoids the forgetful developer that might not run all the tests, or does not have all the tests on their system.

The idea with using tests in a CI process is that we try to fail the build fast and let developers know there is an issue. How we choose to do this is up to us, but there are a few types of unit tests for your database that you might stage and run in serial or parallel to give a developer quick feedback on their commit.

There are various types of testing, but we will limit CI testing to
* Static Code Analysis and Standards Testing
* Unit testing
* Functional Testing
* Performance Testing
* Security Testing

We will talk more about testing in the next module, but for now, understand that each of these should be performed at some point in our software development pipline. In general, we want to fail the build quickly if there are issues and let the developer know.

Since testing usually needs a database, and some of these types of tests require test data, these are usually performed as a separate build that isn't executed after every commit, but rather at discrete times when we are find application code is ready to release, or the changes may impact the live application. In those cases, we would start another build process that performs the functional, performance or load testing, and security testing of our database.

## Packaging Our Database Code
The last part of our CI process is packaging up our database code for deployment to other downstream environments. The way in which we do this is fundamentally different from application code. We won't have a dll or exe here. Instead, we'll have one of two packages, depending on how we perform development.

### Packaging State Based Development Code
If we are working in a state based development model, we need to package up the state of our version control system at the time of our CI build. If we decide this is the version of our database that we want to deploy, we will use this package to run a comparison against our downstream databases and generate the change scripts. If we have any custom code included in our VCS, this also needs to be included.

### Packaging Migration Scripts
If we work in a migrations script development process, then we essentially just need to include the migrations scripts that will be used against downstream databases. However, since we may not know which "version" of the database we deploy against, we may choose to just package all known deployment scripts up, knowing the deployment process will skip any that have already been run.

### Storing the Package
No matter how you've packaged your code, the next step in the process, releasing the code, will require your package. This package of database code will exist as an artifact from the build process, and is managed like any other code artifact.

