# Continuous Testing for Databases

In the last module we briefly touched on testing, but let's look at this in a little more detail. Testing database code is a bit different than other application code, with some requirements, so let's first talk in more detail about the types of testing we want to perform.

There are a number of types of tests we perform in software development, such as
* Static Code Analysis and Standards Testing
* Unit testing
* Functional Testing
* Performance Testing
* Security Testing

There may be other types, but typically we want to ensure all our database code is well tested, simple mistakes are caught, and regression bugs are avoided.

## Standards tests and Static Code Analysis Tests
One thing that can help ensure your code is easier for your developers to work on is ensuring that the code adheres to certain standards. These might be the requirement that certain names are used, certain structures aren't allowed (such as cursors), or perhaps indexes are required.

The idea with these tests is that the code isn't executed, but examined for structural issues. Some of these tests might require the actual database to be built to check the code, but since we do that in the build stage of our CI process, this isn't an issue.

I like to run these tests first, as a first test step that should complete very quickly. If a developer has failed to run these tests on their code, we catch these simple issues quickly, informing the developer of a silly mistake. Over time, as developers learn to code according to the standards and design patterns our organization prefers, these test will likely always pass.

There aren't many static analysis tools available, though I hope that this will change. SQL Englight and SQL Code Guard are the two I know of commercially, and SQLCop is an open source project.

One note I'll make for these types of tests. You need to have the ability to create exceptions for some of these tests. For example, every table should have a primary key, and that's a good test to implement as a static code analysis tests. However, there are reasons to build a table that doesn't have a primary key, for example, for auditing or ETL work. If there is a valid reason to not enforce a PK, then we should have the ability to add an exeption to a test. I've written an article with more technical details on the subject: [Adding PK Exceptions to SQLCop Tests](http://www.sqlservercentral.com/articles/tSQLt/127634/)

## Unit Tests
The idea with unit tests is that we are actually testing that our code works correctly. This is important in our application code, and it can be important in our database code as well.

Since some of our database code is for static objects, such as tables and views, and some is programmatic (functions, stored procedures), we might structure our tests a little differently than we would with application code.

For our tables and views, we often test one of two things. One is that certain referential integrity options exist, and the second is that the API these objects present to our application, which is essentially what their structure creates.

Referential integrity items are those characteristics of our objects. For tables this might be that defaults exist for columns, or that our child table data must have parent rows, or even that computed columns work as expected. For views, we may check on column transformations or even that insert/updates of views work correctly. 

Note that we might define referential integrity explicitly, or we may assume that our other code enforces it. In either case, we want to have tests that ensure that anything we need to ensure that must occur in our data structures actually works.

For our functions and stored procedures, we write tests as we would for an application method or function. We can assemble an environment of tables, variables, and data, then run our stored procedure or function, and finally asserting some fact. Each test should pass or fail based on the requirements of that test.

One final note on testing. We typically need test data in order to run our tests. This makes sense as we're testing the database here. We can assemble test data in each unit test, which is what some people prefer, or you can ensure you have a known set of test data that is always added to your CI process. We will discuss test data more in another module, but for now be aware that we want some test data. However, at the end of every test, we should undo any of our work, which usually means creating a transaction at the start of a test and then rolling back that transaction at the end.

## Other Tests
We certainly should have other types of tests defined beyond these two types. Our application should be tested with the database at some point, we should have larger, functional tests that might examine multiple parts of database code working together, perhaps testing a stored procedure that calls other stored procedures or functions and verifying the entire process works. We want performance or load tests run with production sized, or ever larger, sets of data. There should be security tests to ensure that we are not granting more access to data than necessary. This last set of tests are probably the most important in today's world, but also the least likely to be run in most development teams. I hope that changes in the future.

We should automate as many of these tests as we can. They can be executed after successful completion of earlier sets or tests or left in separate build pipelines that must be manually executed. We may choose to run some of these tests less frequently than we run unit tests, but we do want to run these regularly to determine the health of our codebase.

We will discuss additional testing a bit more in a later section.

One final note on testing is that 100% test coverage is unlikely for most development teams. However, at the very least you should be creating tests for each issue or bug raised with your team. This will ensure you are writing tests for the common mistakes your team makes.
