# Module 2 Labs
These are the labs for module 2

## Lab 2.1 - Committing database changes to our VCS
In this lab we'll make a change to our model, publish the change, verify it, and then commit the change to version control.
1. Let's start by adding a new view to our model. We'll being by right clicking the dbo folder and adding a new folder. We'll name this folder "Views".
2. Next we will add a new view. Right click the "Views" folder and choose Add and then View. Name this view LargeOrders.
3. When the code window opens, create a view that has this code:
```SQL
SELECT *
 FROM [dbo].[OrderDetail]
 WHERE Quantity > 0
```
4. Save this file.
5. Build the project and verify there are no problems.
6. Publish the project to your local PartsUnlimited database.

## Lab 2.2 - Synch Changes from a database
In this lab we will make changes to the database itself and then import those changes into our database project.

1. Open SSMS or the SQL Server Object explorer in VS
2. Connect to your SQL Server instance.
3. Connect to the PartsUnlimited_Dev database.
4. Open a new query window and enter this code:
```SQL
CREATE TABLE Status
( StatusID int identity(1,1),
  StatusDisplay varchar(20)
 );
 ```
 5. Execute this code and create a new table.
 6. In Visual Studio, right click the project name (PartsUnlimited) and select "Schema Compare".
 7. Click the double arrow in the top middle to switch your project to the right edit box.
 8. In the left edit box (Select source), click the drop down and choose "Select Source". Make a connection to your SQL Server and the PartsUnlimited_Dev database in the dialog.
 9. Click Compare.
 10. The results should show a table in the SQL Server database that is not in the project. Click "Update" to update your project.
 11. You should have a new table under the dbo\tables folder and a corresponding change in the Team Explorer.

## Lab 2.3 - Setup a ReadyRoll project
This lab requires Visual Studio Enterprise (VSE). If you do not have this edition, you can download an evaluation from . When you install VSE, you will need to add the Data Storage and processing workload.

To create a new ReadyRoll project, select File | New Project from the menu and choose the Other Languages section and then the SQL Server section. You should see both the Database Project and ReadyRoll Database Project entries. Choose ReadyRoll and give the project the name of "PartsUnlimited_RR". Select an appropriate folder, and choose to add this project to version control.

Set the connection in the ReadyRoll project to the database on your SQL Server instance. We will use this project for the remainder of the labs, so make a connection to your SQL Server and the PartsUnlimited_Dev database.

Click the Import Database button and you should get a single new file that starts with 001 under your Migrations folder in the project. This should contain all the SQL code to build the database.

Commit this code to Version control and publish this to a new repo under your Visualstudio.com account.
