#Database Development Best Practices
Much has been written over the years on the different ways to develop database architectures. All of the modeling advice and knowledge out there still applies to a database DevOps process, though certainly the time scales can be compressed. Regardless of how little time you have, we want to be sure that we produce the best architectural model we can.

In doing so, we do want to adopt a few practices that can help us work in a more rapid fashion.

##Dark Launching
Dark launching is perhaps the key, in my view, to successfully adopting an agile, rapid DevOps process that includes your database. Without this, the coordination effort can be very difficult as your team scales. We want to ensure that if we make changes to the database, we can do so in a non-intrusive manner.

The idea with a dark launch is that we change the system, but the users aren't aware, nor are they interrupted. In application code, we usually implement feature flags or feature toggles that are turned off and allow the application to continue to work as it did prior to the release of the dark features.

In the database, this means if we add objects, or alter existing ones, we don't break the existing application. For example, if we add a column to a table, we can handle this in a few ways. We should provide a default value for inserts, but we need the application architecture to only work with the existing columns. This often means that any queries should explicitly select the columns needed. 

We can also create a view to access the table, which might entail these operations:
* rename the table
* create a view with the old name of the table with only the old columns
* add the new columns to the table.

We can see this in the slide.

At some point, when we are ready, we might reverse this, dropping the view and renaming the table. 

For stored procedures and other objects, we have a couple choices as well. We could add parameters to the stored procedure, again with a default value. If the calling application doesn't know to pass in the parameter, the procedure functions as expected. With the new parameter, the behavior changes.

The other method is to accept the stored procedure as an immutable API, and just create a new procedure with a new name. If you choose this route, I would ensure there is a way to log the usage of the old procedure so that when that drops to zero, we can remove that procedure from the database and tidy up our code.

With either of these choices, there are potential issues. In the first case, over time we may have an unreasonable number of parameters in the procedure call as functionality changes. You can refactor the code over time to remove parameters, but this must be coordinated with the application code. In the second case, we have lots of stored procedures, though perhaps we can remove old versions over time.

##Use Views Carefully
Views are a great technique for abstracting your table from the application. With views, we can certainly free the DBA to make schema changes without disturbing the application. However, there are a few caveats to be aware of.

Inserts and updates through views have limitations, so if you wish to hide tables from the application, I would be sure that a stored procedure is used for insert and update activity. Coordinating a stored procedure change with a table change is easier if there are only a couple procedures to change.

The other issue with views is that developers start to use them like functions or methods and nest them inside of each other. This can create tremendous confusion and cause no shortage of performance issues. I would highly recommend you do not nest views, and instead create views as needed for your application.

##Avoid Column Orders
Since we may have different developers adding columns to the same table, it's possible that the final order of those columns in the table could change. There are even cases where DBAs may rebuild a table to alter the column order, but we wish to avoid this where possible.

Anyone querying the database should avoid the SELECT * wildcard, but even more importantly is to avoid and code that might access columns in numerical order. As shown, we never want to have code that expects a particular column in a particular place.

##Use Error Handling
I am sure that almost every developer understands the importance of error handling. However, relatively few do a good job of actually implementing comprehensive error handling. While I don't expect that every error is handled, I would ensure that database related errors, which may result from database code changes, are logged and handled with notification to the customer, and the DevOps team. These are the type of errors that we want to address quickly.

##Code Cleanup
There are many cases where database changes need to take place over time. For example, if I split a fullname column into two first name and last name columns, I may not be able to remove the fullname column immediately. There may be some applications that use this column and I need to use a trigger to keep the data in sync (or even two triggers). I should designate some amount of time that this situation will exist, and after that time, I remove the triggers and the fullname column.

This is essentially a deprecation of the column and eventually the removal. The same process should be used for old views and stored procedures that eventually fall out of use, or which we decide to stop maintaining.

This is hard in a database, where we may have reporting software, ETL jobs, and more that must be altered to utilize the new schema. Each of these integration points is a form of technical debt, and I would highly suggest that some time is devoted to removing this debt each month. 

We may also have old data that accumulates over time. Perhaps we have lookup options no longer used, or never used. We may have old logging or instrumentation data. We may have copies of data made in case of deployment problems. Be sure you prune this data over time.


##Buy In
Many of these architectural changes require a change in process, developer training, and even a resource commitment to implement. In order to streamline your entire database development process, you will need to change your development process and that usually requires some support from management.

DevOps doesn't require just these changes, or these changes and more, it requires that you find the items that impact your development process and try to remove or ease their burden. As long as you have support from organizatin management, you should be able to achieve this.