# Branching and Merging Database Code

It is inevitable that code conflicts in a DevOps process will occur. The more people who work on the same system, with more rapid changes, the more likely it is that someone will write code in the same area as another person. It doesn't matter how well we coordinate our efforts with project managers, kanban boards, or any tool, we will sometimes end up making changes to the same file. In most application code system, branching and merging is used to ensure that developers don't lose work, aren't unnecessarily blocked by other developers, and have a way to easily reconcile code differences by branching and merging code.

The good news is that database code can fit into the same types of brnaching and merging strategies that many developers employ. The bad news is that merging database code can be more complex because of the nature of databases and the need to maintain state.

## Branching Issues for Databases
In an application software world, we can easily make a branch in our VCS, start writing code and compile it when we're ready. In a database world, this is a little more difficult. I can certainly branch my database code, but my code doesn't necessarily exist by itself. The code is a representation of a database, which often has data in it.

Branching my code and making changes can entail altering data in my database. For example, if I add a new column, I need to decide what data will go in there and how it gets there. I may need to add additional indexing or other structures to support these changes. In addition to the code I write to change my database, I might need other code that manipulates data.

If I want to switch branches, I can easily do that in my VCS, especially with git. However, what do I do with my database? I can't easily switch between two databases where my Sales table has 4 columns in one version and 5 in another. I almost need a new database for each branch, which can become confusing and cumbersome for many developers.

The only good way to do this is to have a separate database for each branch of code. However, this can quickly become confusing, and can be cumbersome if you must switch branches often. The best way to manage branches is only work on one branch at a time. Sync your branch with your database, and then merge your changes immediately.

If you must switch branches before you have completed work, I would suggest you rename your database to include the name of the old branch. Then create a new database, sync with the new branch, and work from there.

The key here, especially with data changes, is to merge often. While I wouldn't necessarily delete my branch when I completed merging to the master branch, I would ensure I kept that branch updated with changes from other developers regularly.

## Merging Challenges
In most merge tools, there is some logical way to merge code together. Often code that touches one part of a file can be merged with changes in another part. The nature of classes, methods, functions, and more make this easy to handle automatically in many cases.

Most tools don't understand T-SQL, which does not lend itself to merges. The structure of a query, or a stored procedure, does not make it easy to merge code, especially for those that are not well versed in the language.

In addition, the transient nature of T-SQL, with CREATE and ALTER statements needed on the same object at different times, mean that a merge migth work one time and not another. If that weren't problematic enough, tables again are an issue. The code to ALTER a table looks completely different from the code to CREATE one. We don't repeat the old, unchanged code, something we do in most other languages.

There are a few tools that can help with merging code, but ultimately this is usually a manual process. Tools can make this easier, but developers will have to decide which changes to keep and which to discard. My advice here is to merge often, or at least pull changes from other developers often so you are aware of what they are changing. If you find conflicting changes to the same object, discuss the issues immediately and find a resolution.

