# Provisioning Databases

One of the challenges with databases, as with other resources that software need such as messaging queues, email systems, and more, are the provisioning requirements. For databases, this can be especially problematic as the provisioning process often needs to add data to a database. Even further, the provisioning process needs to create a resource, a database, then essentially deploy code from our VCS, and finally, come back to the provisioning process to add data. 

This is an area where DevOps and automation are key to ensuring a smooth, efficient, consistent software development environment. This is especially important to ensuring that all configuration settings are the same between environments. The last thing we want to find is a driver, other software, or some setting is different between a development environment and production.

Having an automated way to deploy consistent environments means that in a DR situation, we are confident we can quickly rebuild our production server. In fact, our provisioning for test environments, especially performance test servers should prove this is the case. 

## Seeding Data
One of the issue with new databases is that we often need data. Developers need test data, test systems need test data, load tests need large sets.

We have two issues. Some environments need more or less data. Some environments also need actual production data and some need cleaned or fictional data because of data sensitivity.

In both cases, we need a process that produces the data we need. We may need to create a small set of data, or take a large set of data and remove most of it to produce a representative, smaller data set. We then may optionally need to clean that data set to ensure any PII data is removed.

Our options are limited. There are data generation tools to produce a data set of a certain size. We can certainly automate the creation of these data sets. Alternatively, we can create a known set of data and store that as a backup, a clone (SAN Snapshot, SQL CLone image, etc.), or a set of scripts. Some process can then be used to hydrate a new copy of the database as needed for dev/test purposes.


## Speed
Whatever method we use to create our dev/test databases must be fast and easy. Developers don't like to wait for long processes, and we want them to easily feel they can treat their development database as a disposable item. If they perform some data manipulation and need to reset their environment, they should be able to easily drop the old database, create a new one, sync with source control and continue development.

We also want this to be easy, ideally pressing a button or running a single script. If there is any cumbersome part of the process, developers are likely to avoid using the process. 

Make provisioning fast and easy so your developers are free to experiment, make mistakes, reset their system and easily get back to work on their next experiment.

END

## NOT USED - The Bane of the Shared Database
In many organizations, multiple developers work from a shared database because the storage requirements for a database might be too high to give each developer their own copy of the database. In some cases, the time required, even if storage is available, is too long. This is usually the case where a copy of the production database is used in test and development environments.

While there is nothing fundamentally wrong with this, if your data is not sensitive, there are the issues of developers colliding with each other as they attempt to make changes to their software.

While a shared database saves some resources, such as storage and provisioning time, it wastes other resources, such as developer productivity, or serializing our testing processes. If possible, we want to avoid this.