# Provisioning Databases

One of the challenges with databases, as with other resources that software need such as messaging queues, email systems, and more, are the provisioning requirements. For databases, this can be especially problematic as the provisioning process often needs to add data to a database. Even further, the provisioning process needs to create a resource, a database, then essentially deploy code from our VCS, and finally, come back to the provisioning process to add data. 

This is an area where DevOps and automation are key to ensuring a smooth, efficient, consistent software development environment. This is especially important to ensuring that all configuration settings are the same between environments. The last thing we want to find is a driver, other software, or some setting is different between a development environment and production.

Having an automated way to deploy consistent environments means that in a DR situation, we are confident we can quickly rebuild our production server. In fact, our provisioning for test environments, especially performance test servers should prove this is the case. 

## The Bane of the Shared Database
In many organizations, multiple developers work from a shared database because the storage requirements for a database might be too high to give each developer their own copy of the database. In some cases, the time required, even if storage is available, is too long. This is usually the case where a copy of the production database is used in test and development environments.

While there is nothing fundamentally wrong with this, if your data is not sensitive, there are the issues of developers colliding with each other as they attempt to make changes to their software.

While a shared databse saves some resources, such as storage and provisioning time, it wastes other resources, such as developer productivity, or serializing our testing processes. If possible, we want to avoid this.

## Creating Copies
There are third party tools to help speed up provisioning. There are various snapshot technologies can be used to instantly create copies of a set of database files in seconds. Whether this is on your SAN or with virtual software like Redgate Software's SQL Clone, we ideally want to create copies on demand, inside of minutes.

In the testing section, we talked about the need to create a known, curated set of test data that can be used to populate environments. This is important to having consistent environments outside of production.
