# Dealing with Disparate Environments
One of the issues that some database developers must deal with is deploying their changes to multiple customers, each of whom may have altered the database slightly. While plenty of software companies view changes to the database as a violation of the software EULA, there are also lots of consultants and smaller vendors that want to allow customers to add objects to their databases for various purposes. 

How can you easily deploy your software to different environments that might be slightly different? It can be a challenge for most database developers. However, there are some techniques you can use to make this challenge easier.

There are really two different problems to solve here. The first is how you handle different versions of the same database, such as v1, v2, v2.1, v3, etc. How do you upgrade one version of the database to the next?

The second issue is where you have part of the database being the same across many customers. Perhaps 80% of the tables, views, stored procedures and other objects are the same. The last 20% is different, potentially completely different for every customer. How can you easily manage your code and deployment process in this situation?

It's important to note that in many environments, we have a blend of both of these issues. However, for simplicity, we'll discuss each separately.

##Version Upgrades
In the first case, we essentially have a release problem. Each customer is essentially upgrading at different times, as opposed to the final test system in your software pipeline, which really upgrades with every release.

We could collect all these upgrade scripts, and deploy them all to each customer, but does each customer know what version of the database they have? Does our process capture every version and ensure it's stored somewhere? Are we positive this is accurate?

In a state based world, we can take a snapshot of the current database a customer has, compare this to the latest version available for upgrade, and produce a script. All of the challenges of handling complex changes come into play here, and the various scripts we've written to handle changes like renames, not null columns, and more need to be included. That can be a challenge, and one that many vendors don't like. They would prefer that the customer run each upgrade, from v1 to v2, from v2 to v2.3, etc.

In a migration based development schema, we can send the customer any set of migration scripts from the beginning of development, and the deployment process handles the upgrade seemlessly. This is a simpler method for the vendor with less risk for the customer, though ultimatley this might take longer than a state based change as all changes, even those that might be undone or reversed, are executed.

There is no correct answer here, though I learn towards a migration script strategy in this case.

## Different Database Schemas
In the second case, while we share some objects across customers, the overall schema in each database is different. In this case, we essentially have a separate codebase for each customer. Since most tools view the database as a single unit, this can create complex challenge for the development and release process.

If your process allows for working with a subsection of the database, you are essentially combining two projects for a complete application. One is the shared set of objects, and one is a custom set of objects. When you combine these two projects, what your build and release process needs to do, for each customer, is perform a merge of each project, deploying the changes to the same destination database. 

This merge needs to take place at every state. A developer setting up a project for Customer A will need a database that contains:
* the shared objects from all databases
* the shared data from all databases
* the custom objects for Customer A
* the custom data for Customer A

This means the packaging process to pull this out from our VCS must be duplicated for the CI build and for the release packaging. The use of tokens or parameters are important here to simplify the automation so that each customer doesn't have a separate build and release process defined. That's a sure way to lose control of your environment when your process changes and someone forgets to ensure the change gets to all customer development pipelines.

This isn't easy, and if you must work in an environment like this, I would warn you that the adoption of a DevOps process will be slower than with a single schema. The way to approach this is slowly, adopting essentially two DevOps processes that target the same destination database for one customer. Once that works, then add a second customer, slowly teasing out the dependencies you have on the custom objects and data.

On the Redgate Software blog, Alex Yates, of DLM Consultants, has a series that explains how he can deploy different versions of a single database to different environments. This isn't the only way to solve this issue, but it does prevent one idea.
